Add access statement (#4676)
processing/p5.js: contributor_docs/access.md

# Our Focus on Access

> At the [2019 Contributors Conference](https://p5js.org/community/contributors-conference-2019.html), we made a commitment to only add features to p5.js that increase access (meaning inclusion and/or accessibility). This means we prioritize the needs of marginalized groups over the continued comfort of more privileged groups with p5.js.

Reviewer: I'm not sure about the use of marginalized and whether it reinforces marginalization. Maybe say something like historically excluded and underrepresented?

> At the [2019 Contributors Conference](https://p5js.org/community/contributors-conference-2019.html), we made a commitment to only add features to p5.js that increase access (meaning inclusion and/or accessibility). This means we prioritize the needs of marginalized groups over the continued comfort of more privileged groups with p5.js.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the [2019 Contributors Conference](https://p5js.org/community/contributors-conference-2019.html), we made a commitment to only add features to p5.js that increase access (meaning inclusion and/or accessibility). This means considering the vectors of diversity (e.g. gender, social, economic, race, ethnicity, language, ability, etc.) that can impact access/participation, and taking action to acknowledge, dismantle, and prevent barriers. We prioritize the needs of historically marginalized groups over the continued comfort of more privileged groups with p5.js.
```

Author: @lm-n i love this, thank you!

> This is not the first conversation we've had about access and inclusion. We share similar intentions in our [Community Statement](../CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md), which was written at the [2015 Contributors Conference](https://p5js.org/community/contributors-conference-2015.html).

Reviewer 2: Maybe reword "This is not the first conversation we've had about access and inclusion..." to "This is part of an ongoing conversation about access and inclusion within p5.js. Our intention to hold these as core values from which p5.js is built is laid out in our [Community Statement]..."

Reviewer 2: Maybe one more statement to the effect of: "We engage in accessibility work in the context of anti-racist work, and believe it's necessary to understand the ways that factors such as disability, gender, sexuality, and class intersect with, and disproportionately affect people based on race." I don't know if that's quite it but trying to get there...

Author: > This is part of an ongoing conversation

@lmccart i like this framing a lot better thank you! will think about phrasing for the "we engage" statement. if anyone else has ideas for that please share! :)

Author: @lmccart does this line we added cover this point you had? or is there another point to make sure we cover?

> This means considering the vectors of diversity (e.g. gender, social, economic, race, ethnicity, language, ability, etc.) that can impact access/participation; and taking action to acknowledge, dismantle, and prevent barriers.

Reviewer 2: @outofambit I want to take a crack at one more line after that paragraph that speaks to intersectionality. I think right now we are mentioning the different vectors to consider within diversity but we might recognize how these play into each other and shouldn't be treated in isolation. I can work on this in the next couple days and propose something.

**Please consider this a starting point.** We want to invite more conversations about what access means and how we can prioritize it.

## Kinds of access

> Increasing access is not a focus on expanding the raw number of people in the p5.js community. It is a focus on making p5.js available to and approachable for more people who are excluded from the p5.js community (intentionally or not) and people who are excluded from similar tools.

Reviewer 2: for clarity of language and conciseness, suggestion to change "approachable for more people" to "approachable for people"

Author: changed this with @lm-n's suggestion!

> Increasing access is not a focus on expanding the raw number of people in the p5.js community. It is a focus on making p5.js available to and approachable for more people who are excluded from the p5.js community (intentionally or not) and people who are excluded from similar tools.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Increasing access is not a focus on expanding the raw number of people in the p5.js community. It is a focus on making p5.js available to and approachable for people who are excluded from the p5.js community (intentionally or not) and from similar tools and communities.
```

Access here means making p5.js better for:

> - People who speak Spanish, Chinese, or other languages besides English

Reviewer 2: add Korean (launching soon). or maybe remove specific languages altogether?

Reviewer 3: i vote removing specific languages altogether so it's easy to maintain and there are no hierarchies :)

Author: done!

> - People who speak Spanish, Chinese, or other languages besides English

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- People who speak languages other than English
```

> - People who are Black, Indigenous, or people of Color

Reviewer 2: capitalize people or lc Color

Author: ✅

> - People who are Black, Indigenous, or people of Color

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Black people, Indigenous peoples, and people of Color
```
changing wording and "or" for "and"

- People who are lesbian, gay, bisexual, trans, or queer
- People with marginalized genders

> - People who are disabled or sick

Reviewer 2: + An item about income / class

Reviewer: - also add item about rural communities

Reviewer 2: For the first point above, maybe:
- People who lack opportunities and/or resources to engage with creative coding due to class or income

Reviewer 3: @lm-n what about
People from the Global South
?

Author: i added the class/income language from @lmccart :)

Reviewer: @montoyamoraga I feel uncomfortable with Global South... @dorothysantos do you have any ideas?

Reviewer: @drsantos8791 just realized I tagged your other github account. Can you help us with the people that are not from North America/Europe?

Reviewer 4: @lm-n Not a problem! It was easier for me to create a PF-specific GitHub account. Pardon the confusion. 

As for the "Global South," I understand your discomfort because in places such as the Philippines, for instance, the country (and in the education and tech spheres/realms) experience "brain drain" (not the best terminology, but this phenomenon has been documented). Essentially, even within the Filipino community, class is a huge issue that can't be easily remedied by support from a US-based program because you may be providing this opportunity to someone who readily has access to these opportunities within their region or country. This topic is such a thorny one, to be honest. I have too many thoughts for a comment, honestly. But I can see how we might flatten experiences and this is why transnational perspectives are super important. @montoyamoraga @lmccart @xinemata We can discuss for the future! Definitely an important issue especially as we think about translation projects.

Reviewer 2: @lm-n @montoyamoraga @drsantos8791 this doesn't address all the issues here by any means, but could "non-western" be a useful term?

Reviewer: @lmccart I definitely think "non-western" is better than "Global South"! But in translation it might get lost, in Spanish language the idea of the "west" includes Latin America and the Caribbean while in American English these regions are "non-western."

> - People who are disabled or sick

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- People with disabilities or illness
```

> - and other people who are systemically excluded

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- and other people who are systemically excluded and traditionally underrepresented
```

Author: @lm-n would you be ok with dropping the word "traditionally" here? or perhaps we could use "historically" instead? i don't feel strongly about this, just want to ask! feel free to say no.
```suggestion
- and other people who are systemically excluded and historically underrepresented
```

### Examples

These are examples of efforts we believe to increase access:

- Translating more documentation and other materials into more languages

> - Improving out support for assistive devices (such as screenreaders)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Improving our support for assistive devices (such as screenreaders)
```

Typo

> - Improving out support for assistive devices (such as screenreaders)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Improving our support for assistive technologies (such as screenreaders)
- Following Web Content Accessibility Guidelines in our tools and working towards making it easier for users to follow them in their projects.
```

> - Making p5.js error messages more helpful and supportive to developers

Reviewer 2: + Teaching p5.js to groups that are marginalized or excluded within coding and/or the arts.

Reviewer: This is really important but I think we could write in a different way... "Teaching p5.js to people that are marginalized or excluded..." could be read as if we were on missionary quest to evangelize people. 
Maybe: 
- Supporting learning and teaching p5.js in communities that have been historically marginalized, excluded, and underrepresented in creative coding and digital arts???  

Just an idea, I think it still needs improvement. @montoyamoraga @lmccart @outofambit  what do you think/help?

Author: @lm-n that's a good point! i like @lmccart's because it highlights the act of teaching itself (we have other items that cover documentation and coding work already). hmm, how about something like this?

* Mentoring and supporting learners of p5.js _within_ communities that are historically excluded from and marginalized in creative coding and the digital arts

Reviewer: I like "Mentoring and supporting learners of p5.js within communities that are historically excluded from and marginalized in creative coding and the digital arts" 😸 🥰

Author: added!

> - Making p5.js error messages more helpful and supportive to developers

Reviewer 2: replace "developers" with "people using the tool"

Author: ✅

There are other things we haven't thought of yet and we're excited to figure out what they are together. If you have an idea, please [share it as an issue](https://github.com/processing/p5.js/issues/new/choose).

## Maintenance

> We also affirm our intention to maintain the existing feature set of p5.js. We'd like to fix bugs regardless of which area of the codebase they're in or how closely they are related to our focus on access.

Reviewer 2: maybe replace "or how closely they are related to our focus on access." with something like "because we believe consistency of the tool makes it more accessible for beginners."

This is part of an ongoing conversation about access and inclusion within p5.js. Our intention to hold these as core values from which p5.js is built is laid out in our [Community Statement](../CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md), which was written at the [2015 Contributors Conference](https://p5js.org/community/contributors-conference-2015.html).

**Please consider this a starting point.** We want to invite more conversations about what access means and how we can prioritize it.

## Kinds of access

Increasing access is not a focus on expanding the raw number of people in the p5.js community. It is a focus on making p5.js available to and approachable for people who are excluded from the p5.js community (intentionally or not) and from similar tools and communities.

Access here means making p5.js better for:

- People who speak languages other than English
- Black people, Indigenous peoples, and People of Color
- People who are lesbian, gay, bisexual, trans, or queer
- People with marginalized genders
- People with disabilities or illness

> - and other people who are systemically excluded and historically underrepresented

Reviewer: I'm also wondering if we should add novices/beginners here. 
```suggestion
- People with little or no prior experience in open source and creative coding 
- and other people who are systemically excluded and historically underrepresented
```

Author: yes! i had a thought about that before but forgot to write something!

This is part of an ongoing conversation about access and inclusion within p5.js. Our intention to hold these as core values from which p5.js is built is laid out in our [Community Statement](../CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md), which was written at the [2015 Contributors Conference](https://p5js.org/community/contributors-conference-2015.html).

**Please consider this a starting point.** We want to invite more conversations about what access means and how we can prioritize it.

## Kinds of access

Increasing access is not a focus on expanding the raw number of people in the p5.js community. It is a focus on making p5.js available to and approachable for people who are excluded from the p5.js community (intentionally or not) and from similar tools and communities.

Access here means making p5.js better for:

- People who speak languages other than English
- Black people, Indigenous peoples, and People of Color
- People who are lesbian, gay, bisexual, trans, or queer
- People with marginalized genders
- People with disabilities or illness

> - People with little or no prior experience in open source and creative coding 

Reviewer 2: my one nit-picky question here is how do we determine "little prior experience"? would it include anyone that is a student? would it include someone that has mastered the basics of coding? i'm trying to get specific here because i see it would be easy to make an argument for most features being helpful for to those with little experience, given that is our majority user demographic.

Reviewer 3: i agree, it's hard to draw the line of what features should be added, i think that it is hard to grasp all the use cases of the p5.js features, so people can easily propose a new feature, and adding it seems like little work, but it involves a lot of work on the development, or the proposed feature, is a corner case of new features.

something that i am always thinking is that new features, longer documentation, more dependencies add more chances for breaking, adds more barriers to people who want to read the source code, or help out. i will keep on thinking about this too, i don't know a good way to phrase this or explain this :)

Reviewer 4: Great start! But I want us to start expanding and going beyond words such as "'underrepresented’, ‘underserved’, ‘marginalized’ or ‘minority." I know this is a longer conversation about semantics, but in the past few years, there has been a push to not use these words. More soon!

Reviewer 2: @drsantos8791 I think we may need more help here. Do you have suggestions for alternative phrasing? For example in these phrases: 
- `We prioritize the needs of historically marginalized groups over the continued comfort of more privileged groups with p5.js.`
- `Mentoring and supporting learners of p5.js within communities that are historically excluded from and marginalized in creative coding and the digital arts`

Reviewer 4: @lmccart At the moment, and after reading through several articles on this issue, I don't have any further suggestions. Also, I feel these statements best exemplify the mission and objective of what we're trying to do. If I come across suggestions, I will gladly share them with the group. But at the moment, I don't have alternatives. Thank you for checking in.

Reviewer 2: Thank you @drsantos8791! And this is a living document so we can continue to update as we learn more and develop our language and thinking.

# Our Focus on Access

> At the [2019 Contributors Conference](https://p5js.org/community/contributors-conference-2019.html), we made a commitment to only add features to p5.js that increase access (meaning inclusion and/or accessibility). This means considering the vectors of diversity (e.g. gender, social, economic, race, ethnicity, language, ability, etc.) that can impact access/participation; and taking action to acknowledge, dismantle, and prevent barriers. We prioritize the needs of historically marginalized groups over the continued comfort of more privileged groups with p5.js.

Reviewer 6: please change "ability" to "disability." this is preferred terminology when speaking about the disability community, as it foregrounds the "dis," which is the political part.

Author: thank you @agenusofmoth! made this change in ce00df9.

> We will not accept feature requests that don't support our effort to increase access. You'll see this criteria reflected in our issue and pull request templates.

Author: @limzykenneth @lmccart @montoyamoraga this seem okay for being explicit about not accepting some work based on this criteria?

Reviewer 5: Seems good to me.

Reviewer: 👏🏼
